okay well
nice to be here
um
a couple of years ago
the mathematician Hannah fry made a TV
documentary about Ada Lovelace
the 19th century computer Theory pioneer
it was about an episode
in the history of ideas
which would have been absolutely pivotal
if anybody had noticed it at the time
or in other words if love lace hadn't
died young
because
well from the evidence in that
documentary I suspect that the first
person to get the universality of
computation
was actually Lovelace and not her
colleague Charles Babbage the designer
of
the universal computer that she was
theorizing about the
babbage's analytical engine
never built but like many of these
computers the significance was in the
design and the theory rather than actual
building
the thing is
the analytical engine would have had two
kinds of universality
and Babbage was obsessed with one of
them
he had perhaps been the first human
being to understand what what one could
call arithmetical universality in his
previous design the Difference Engine
could compute polynomials in one fixed
Point variable so you know very limited
kind of universalities universal for
those but Babbage realized that if he
added just a few more features
uh conceptually very simple
the machine would make the jump to
universality becoming the analytical
engine Universal for
any arithmetic function of any number of
variables of any finite Precision
basically what we would today call
computable functions so this was
arithmetical universality
what Lovelace understood I think
was the significance of the analytical
engine's ability to compute not just any
arithmetic but anything in the world
in the physical world
she envisaged all sorts of applications
like computer music and art and chess
and and so on
but this wasn't just a matter of
usefulness
the abilities of the analytical engine
[Music]
as a physical object
depend on a momentous property of the
laws of physics themselves all of them
namely
while the analytical engine could
instantiate a tiny fraction of all an
infinitesimal fraction of all
mathematical objects and relationships
it could also apparently
apparently
instantiate or simulate or emulate all
possible motions
of all possible physical objects and
their laws not just a tiny subset
this physical universality is an
intrinsic property of the laws of
physics
it doesn't follow from babbage's
mathematical arithmetical universality
it has nothing to do with mathematics
in fact neither of the universalities
follows from the other
yet it seemed that both of them were
exhibited by the same machine why
whatever the reason
it's in the laws of physics it would
make no sense to try to prove this other
than from the laws of physics
this Unity of the two universalities was
also conjectured later
explicitly by Alan Turing in the 20th
century it's just turing's conjecture
sometimes called the church during
thesis it has various names
but the usual way that this conjecture
is described is not
that it's the unity of those two
universalities
why not
well curings great paper presenting his
conjecture
had an application as he put it
to a fundamental puzzle posed by the
mathematician David Hilbert basically
what is the relationship between a true
mathematical statement an approvable one
Hilbert had hoped that one could Define
a system of proof such that a
mathematical statement was true if and
only if it could be proved under that
system
in the 1930s
mathematicians converge from several
directions on the realization that that
is impossible
notably Kurt girdle proved that there
can be no method of proof that
identifies all true mathematical
propositions
now turing's approach
did exactly the same in that respect
but it had wider implications as we now
know because of these physical objects
computers
the reason turing's approach had this
additional reach
was that
girdles model of proof
was a model inside the arithmetic of the
integers so nothing to do with
computation he simply defined proofs as
finite sequences
of symbols drawn from a finite set and
all that stuff
but there was no girdles conjecture
it was touring who realized that that
notion of what proving something means
isn't self-evidence so he acknowledged
it as a substantive conjecture the
Turing conjecture
the model of proof that he used was
computation
and the model of computation that he
used was physical
[Music]
strips of paper divided into squares
with symbols and a finite set of
discrete operations on them the
universal turing machine
and when he conjectured
that this machine was Universal for
proofs
the phrase he used was that it could
compute anything which would naturally
be regarded as computable
naturally
at the time the word computer meant a
human being it wasn't one of these
things it a person whose job was to
manipulate symbols on sheets of paper
and the manipulators obeying the rules
human beings are physical systems
so by
anything that would naturally be
regarded as computable
he meant computable in nature by
physical objects and by provable he
meant provable by physical objects
now that conjecture
unlike girdle's proofs
might have been false
but it turned out to be true in nature
or rather very nearly true
as Richard finally remarked
they thought they understood paper
but they didn't
and when when I
when I proved curing's conjecture from
quantum theory
in 1985 it was with the slight
correction that the universal machine is
not turing's paper machine nor babbage's
brass gear machine but the universal
quantum computer
but I soon found out
that not everyone saw it that way
the ref I also had a referee problem the
referee of the paper in which I I
presented that proof insisted that
turing's phrase would naturally regard
as computable referred to mathematical
naturalness mathematical intuition not
nature
and so what I had proved wasn't turing's
conjecture it was about physics
so I asked some mathematicians what
mathematical intuition is
turned out it was as much of a mystery
to them as to me so some of them said it
was meta mathematical intuition
fair enough
but they couldn't tell me what that was
either
some kind of mathematical mysticism I
think
but one thing they were all adamant
about nevertheless was that turing's
conjecture was about whether his
mathematical model of proof matched
not the physical world but something
else
like mathematical Intuition or something
now turing's basic Insight was that
proof is computation and computation is
physical and hence proof is physical
that it isn't physical seemed to me a
philosophical absurdity
but it was an absurdity that all the
mathematicians I asked insisted on
and most
not all
most non-mathematicians who thought
about computation
didn't
so I called it the mathematician's
misconception the denial that proof is
physical is one way of putting it
by the way
the Rolf landauer uh Charles Bennett's
old boss had been campaigning for years
with the slogan computation is physical
and proof also
just to be clear
mathematical facts like Thurman's Last
Theorem
aren't physical
that there is a difference between truth
and provability was the main point of
all those 1930s discoveries
still
in my paper I had to defer to prevailing
usage
so I changed it to Define turing's
conjecture as that vague meta
mathematical idea
and the referee at least agreed to let
me call my result a proof of the touring
principle
to distinguish it from the conjecture
the principle that can be a physical
object whose motions contain
those of all other objects
nevertheless now people sometimes call
that the church touring Deutsche
principle and and that's how that's how
the mathematician's conception ended up
giving me credit for something Alan
Turing did
and arguably Ada Lovelace did
a few years later I gave a talk in
Oxford arguing that it makes no sense to
regard turing's conjecture in any form
as something one might hope to prove one
day from from logic like Famous Last
Theorem
but that it could be proved to be a
property of quantum mechanics
sitting in the front row was Robin Gandy
who'd worked with Turing
and he got to be agitated and at the end
he stood up
and declared
with with Good Humor but very
emphatically I've never heard such a
load of rubbish in my life
I I tried to explain further but he
seemed implacable
he'd also given a talk at the same event
and at the dinner afterwards he came
over to where I was sitting and he said
you know I think there might have been a
grain of Truth in there somewhere let's
talk about it later and we did discuss
it later but unfortunately we did not
reach a resolution
he was a mathematician
he had the misconception
unfortunately in in the bigger picture
the mathematician's misconception has
done more than just cause amusing
anecdotes
it expresses the idea
acknowledged or not that somewhere out
there in in the world of mathematical
abstractions or in some Supernatural
world of mathematical intuition
there is the authentic official
though ineffable
now we know that Hilbert was wrong
ineffable definition of proof
and if some physical process that
doesn't conform to that definition
turns out to allow us to know some new
necessary truth
that process wouldn't constitute a proof
of that truth
there's the misconception
it so happens
that a quantum computers repertoire of
integer functions is the same as the
Turing machines they differ only in
speed
so some people view this as vindicating
that mathematician's misconception but
no
first of all we only know that they only
differ in speed from physics from
quantum theory
and second
quantum theory won't be the final Theory
of physics
and even if it is you can't prove that
either from mathematical intuition in
reality we only have physical intuition
never provable always incomplete always
full of errors
the misconception also affects thinking
about information
for example a Quantum cryptographic
device May perform a classical
information processing task that is
provably impossible classically
so the misconception makes people say
well Quantum cryptography isn't an
information processing task it's just an
engineering task like building a washing
machine
why because
Turing machines couldn't perform it
again they think that there's a
mathematical definition of information
out there somewhere independent of
physics
the same holds for probability by the
way
similarly again the answer to Eugene
wigner's famous question about why
mathematics is unreasonably effective as
you put it in science
is not that the mathem that the physical
world is actually being computed on a
vast computer belonging to God
or to supernormal aliens
because there's no reason
other than the misconception
why the snaelian's computer
should itself generate that particular
tiny piece of mathematics that we call
computable
purely mathematical intuition will never
reveal anything about proof
or computation or probability or
information
if you want to understand any of those
things fundamentally you must start with
laws of physics
and in particular with what is currently
the most fundamental theory in physics
quantum theory
It won't always be the most fundamental
but its replacement
will not come from mathematics or logic
or the supernatural
okay that's it
[Applause]
provoking talk
any questions from any mathematician
I have a very simple question what is
physical
uh
yes
um it's a bit like asking what is real
um there there seem to be various I
don't know is the answer but there seem
to be various levels of reality
and uh there's a level that's only
accessible by experiment and then
there's the level that's to find out
what laws laws the laws are and then
there's the level that is independent of
the law so we know that Fermat's Last
Theorem is true and if if somebody comes
and and uh finds that general relativity
has a flaw or quantum theory has a flaw
nobody will worry that maybe Fermat's
Last Theorem isn't true
laws of physics I think unlike that they
are things that could be overturned at
any moment we we guess at them
so I can't provide an answer better than
that it's it's
um a deep question
it's more questions
um yes um I think uh I am I am confused
can you
um
uh can you explain the difference
between what is like mathematical like
like which is like in the top a
mathematical proof of physics proof from
what I understood is the physics one I
think well you have to draw a
distinction between
um what issues of what we can know how
do we know things their physics is at
the top
uh we we conjecture laws of physics we
test them from our physical intuition we
then develop mathematical intuitions
from uh from there we learn about
mathematics
uh however
um there are necessary truths which are
independent of the laws of physics and
they don't become any less necessary if
we don't know them
so as far as the necessity of Truth goes
um mathematics is at the top its truths
are necessary but our knowledge is the
other way around it comes via physics
that clearer yeah
okay we still have a couple of minutes
so let me ask a question myself
I know that you are a great advocate of
the Multiverse explanation for quantum
mechanics but now you also say the
quantum mechanics most probably is not
the last word can you
combine the two thoughts
um I think that the the Multiverse
interpretation
um is on the same level of of
um I mean the existence of the
Multiverse is is on the same level as as
the existence of the dinosaurs you know
it's that is not going to be proven
false what what is going to be proof
false is what the Multiverse consists of
what the what the structure of it is
we don't actually have a very good idea
of what the structure of it is at the
moment or even within quantum theory we
kind of know how to uh
do calculations and we know that
as we sit here in a lecture room there
are other copies of us uh watching a
different lecture and uh listening to
you know different people won the prize
and so on uh so we know that is true
but the details are going to change
because quantum theory is in many ways
totally unsatisfactory look at quantum
gravity for example
some people do not support this
Multiverse interpretation so you say
they're simply wrong or this well
they're all wrong in different ways but
yes
[Applause]
[Music]
well I'm going to ask David about
something that I think he thinks
uh
in this
would you describe yourself as as a
technological Optimist yes
okay well I used to be a technological
Optimist but I then started studying a
little bit cosmology and maybe thinking
too hard about the copernican principle
and it occurred to me that perhaps the
universe is infinite but
of the
self-destructive Tendencies of of the
civilization that we're in our
particular bubble suggests that it may
not last more than a few thousand years
and that's okay because they're
infinitely infinitely many other bubbles
where they do better
we're just not in a good one
uh but I think you think maybe one of
those bubbles will get will get it right
well enough so that it can spread its
beneficent influence throughout
everywhere whatever that means what's
your reaction to that question I think
the mistake there is is when you said
the the the evidence of our
self-destructive nature
by hour you meant our civilization or
our species or whatever basically
for yourself yes
well it's obvious that all that all of
our past was worse than the present and
the evidence that we're self-destructive
is all
what you might call extrapolation
it's extrapolating and in order to reach
that conclusion you've got to
extrapolate selectively
if we had if we had destroyed ourselves
we wouldn't be here to complain about it
uh well okay that's that's one argument
on the other side but it's not very
convincing because it would could always
be made no matter how good things are
[Applause]
um if you look at the actual details we
have time and again solved problems and
our particular civilization is different
from all other ones in the previous ones
in that respect so you can't extrapolate
from them either all civilizations
basically other than our current
scientific technological or whatever you
call it uh civilization have in fact
been destroyed
and it's another interesting thing is
that none of them were destroyed by the
ways that by the ways that pessimists
suggest ours will be destroyed so
there's again a disconnect so it doesn't
work
well just one question because
um how you you said deprivability as
well as the validity which is true in
all interpretation motor or physicals
how you make the distinction because one
is semantics essentially proved the
validity and the other part is purely
syntactical which is the proof of
everything I don't think mathematical
truth is syntactical I I well in that
respect I'm a platonist or something
yeah uh I think there are mathematical
objects out there only in a different
sense to the sense in which there are
physical objects out there but you have
to distinguish between
the necessary features of the things
that are out there and the method by
which we find out about them in the case
of the mathematical truths we definitely
only have access to an infinitesimal
proportion of them
but with physical truths we seem to have
access there's nothing that that seems
fundamentally hidden from us
Let's uh